cloud: add doc for sink to gcs (#14527)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/changefeed-sink-to-cloud-storage.md

Reviewer: Preview: https://pingcap-docs-website-scaffold-git-preview-clou-e40220-ran-huang.vercel.app/tidbcloud/changefeed-sink-to-cloud-storage

Author: 这个图片在 preview 里显示不出来， 知道为什么？
<img width="772" alt="Screen Shot 2023-08-17 at 14 41 22" src="https://github.com/pingcap/docs/assets/1153021/9def5dd0-d482-4925-944d-97db328e20a5">

Reviewer: 因为不是这个 PR 里新增的图片，现在的 preview 方式拿不到。可以忽略

---
title: Sink to Cloud Storage

> Summary: Learn how to create a changefeed to stream data from a TiDB Dedicated cluster to cloud storage, such as Amazon S3, GCS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Summary: Learn how to create a changefeed to stream data from a TiDB Dedicated cluster to cloud storage, such as Amazon S3 and GCS.
```

---

# Sink to Cloud Storage

> This document describes how to create a changefeed to stream data from TiDB Cloud to cloud storage. Currently, only Amazon S3 and GCS are supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document describes how to create a changefeed to stream data from TiDB Cloud to cloud storage. Currently, Amazon S3 and GCS are supported.
```

        - storage.objects.update
        - storage.objects.get
        - storage.objects.list
        - storage.objects.delete

    ![Add permissions](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-assign-permission.png)

3. Go to the [Bucket](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser) page, and choose a GCS bucket you want TiDB Cloud to access. Note that the GCS bucket must be in the same region as your TiDB cluster.

4. On the **Bucket details** page, click the **Permissions** tab, and then click **Grant access**.

    ![Grant Access to the bucket ](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-grant-access-1.png)

5. Fill in the following information to grant access to your bucket, and then click **Save**.

    - In the **New Principals** field, paste the **Service Account ID** of the target TiDB cluster you recorded before.
    - In the **Select a role** drop-down list, type the name of the IAM role you just created, and then choose the name from the filter result.

    > **Note:**
    >
    > To remove the access to TiDB Cloud, simply remove the access that you have granted.

6. On the **Bucket details** page, click the **Objects** tab.

>     If you want to copy a bucket's gsutil URI, click the copy button and add `gs://` as prefix.
> 
>     ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri01.png)
> 
>     For example, if the folder name is `test-sink-gcs`, then the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/`.
> 
>     If you want to use a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button add `gs://` as prefix..
> 
>     ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri02.png)
> 
>     For example, if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, then the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx` as the URI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - To get a bucket's gsutil URI, click the copy button and add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the folder name is `test-sink-gcs`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/`.

        ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri01.png)

    - To get a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx`.

        ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri02.png)
```

> 7. In the TiDB Cloud console, go to the Changefeed's "Configure Destination" page, paste the GCS bucket gsutil URI to the **Bucket gsutil** URI field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. In the TiDB Cloud console, go to the Changefeed's **Configure Destination** page, and fill in the **bucket gsutil URI** field.
```

- Because TiDB Cloud uses TiCDC to establish changefeeds, it has the same [restrictions as TiCDC](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-overview#unsupported-scenarios).
- If the table to be replicated does not have a primary key or a non-null unique index, the absence of a unique constraint during replication could result in duplicated data being inserted downstream in some retry scenarios.

> ## Step 1. Create a changefeed

Reviewer: I broke the long process down into three major steps. They'll be easier to follow.

1. Navigate to the cluster overview page of the target TiDB cluster, and then click **Changefeed** in the left navigation pane.

2. Click **Create Changefeed**, and select **Amazon S3** or **GCS** as the destination.

## Step 2. Connect to cloud storage

You can choose either Amazon S3 or GCS as a cloud storage.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="Amazon S3">

For **Amazon S3**, fill the **S3 Endpoint** area: `S3 URI`, `Access Key ID`, and `Secret Access Key`. Make the S3 bucket at the same region with your TiDB Cluster.

![s3_endpoint](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-s3-endpoint.jpg)

</div>
<div label="GCS">

> For **GCS**, please fill the **GCS Endpoint** area.
> 
> ![gcs_endpoint](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-endpoint.jpg)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For **GCS**, before filling **GCS Endpoint**, you need to first grant the GCS bucket access and make the GCS bucket at the same region with your TiDB cluster. Take the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For **GCS**, before filling **GCS Endpoint**, you need to first grant the GCS bucket access. Take the following steps:
```

> 1. In the TiDB Cloud console, record the **Service Account ID** field's value, which will be used to grant TiDB Cloud access to your GCS bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the TiDB Cloud console, record the **Service Account ID**, which will be used later to grant TiDB Cloud access to your GCS bucket.
```

    2. Go to the [Roles](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/roles) page, and then click **Create role**.

        ![Create a role](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-create-role.png)

    3. Enter a name, description, ID, and role launch stage for the role. The role name cannot be changed after the role is created.
    4. Click **Add permissions**.
    5. Add the following read-only permissions to the role, and then click **Add**.

        - storage.buckets.get
        - storage.objects.create
        - storage.objects.update
        - storage.objects.get
        - storage.objects.list
        - storage.objects.delete

        ![Add permissions](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-assign-permission.png)

3. Go to the [Bucket](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser) page, and click the name of the GCS bucket you want TiDB Cloud to access.
4. On the **Bucket details** page, click the **Permissions** tab, and then click **Grant access**.

    ![Grant Access to the bucket ](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-grant-access-1.png)

> 5. Fill in the following information to grant access to your bucket, and then click **SAVE**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Fill in the following information to grant access to your bucket, and then click **Save**.
```

    - In the **New Principals** field, paste the **Service Account ID** of the target TiDB cluster you recorded before.
    - In the **Select a role** drop-down list, type the name of the IAM role you just created, and then choose the name from the filter result.

    > **Note:**
    >
    > To remove the access to TiDB Cloud, you can simply remove the access that you have granted.

5. On the **Bucket details** page, click the **Objects** tab.

    If you want to copy a bucket's gsutil URI, click the copy button and add `gs://` as prefix.

    ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri01.png)
    
    For example, if the folder name is `test-sink-gcs`, then the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/`.

    If you want to use a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button add `gs://` as prefix.. 

    ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri02.png)
    

>     For example, if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, then the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx` as the URI.

Reviewer: 下一步里只需要用到 bucket URI，这里是不是没必要讲 folder gsutil URI？

Author: 应该是下一步的名词用得不好， 两种都可能使用

- If the table to be replicated does not have a primary key or a non-null unique index, the absence of a unique constraint during replication could result in duplicated data being inserted downstream in some retry scenarios.

## Step 1. Configure destination

Navigate to the cluster overview page of the target TiDB cluster. Click **Changefeed** in the left navigation pane, click **Create Changefeed**, and select **Amazon S3** or **GCS** as the destination. The configuration process varies depend on the destination you choose.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="Amazon S3">

For **Amazon S3**, fill the **S3 Endpoint** area: `S3 URI`, `Access Key ID`, and `Secret Access Key`. Make the S3 bucket in the same region with your TiDB cluster.

![s3_endpoint](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-s3-endpoint.jpg)

</div>
<div label="GCS">

For **GCS**, before filling **GCS Endpoint**, you need to first grant the GCS bucket access. Take the following steps:

1. In the TiDB Cloud console, record the **Service Account ID**, which will be used to grant TiDB Cloud access to your GCS bucket.

    ![gcs_endpoint](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-endpoint.png)

> 2. In the Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Management Console, create an IAM role for your GCS bucket.

Reviewer 2: GCP 已经改名叫 Google Cloud https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/developers-practitioners/introducing-new-homepage-google-cloud

```suggestion
2. In the Google Cloud Management Console, create an IAM role for your GCS bucket.
```

>     1. Sign in to the [GCP Management Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. Sign in to the [Google Cloud Management Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/).
```

    2. Go to the [Roles](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/roles) page, and then click **Create role**.

        ![Create a role](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-create-role.png)

    3. Enter a name, description, ID, and role launch stage for the role. The role name cannot be changed after the role is created. 
    4. Click **Add permissions**. Add the following read-only permissions to the role, and then click **Add**.

>         - storage.buckets.get
>         - storage.objects.create
>         - storage.objects.update
>         - storage.objects.get
>         - storage.objects.list
>         - storage.objects.delete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - storage.buckets.get
        - storage.objects.create
        - storage.objects.delete        
        - storage.objects.get
        - storage.objects.list
        - storage.objects.update        
```

    ![Add permissions](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-assign-permission.png)

3. Go to the [Bucket](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser) page, and choose a GCS bucket you want TiDB Cloud to access. Note that the GCS bucket must be in the same region as your TiDB cluster.

4. On the **Bucket details** page, click the **Permissions** tab, and then click **Grant access**.

    ![Grant Access to the bucket ](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-grant-access-1.png)

5. Fill in the following information to grant access to your bucket, and then click **Save**.

    - In the **New Principals** field, paste the **Service Account ID** of the target TiDB cluster you recorded before.
    - In the **Select a role** drop-down list, type the name of the IAM role you just created, and then choose the name from the filter result.

    > **Note:**
    >
    > To remove the access to TiDB Cloud, simply remove the access that you have granted.

6. On the **Bucket details** page, click the **Objects** tab.

>     - To get a bucket's gsutil URI, click the copy button and add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the folder name is `test-sink-gcs`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/`.

Author: "folder name" => "bucket name"

        ![Get bucket URI](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-gcs-uri01.png)

>     - To get a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx`.

Author: "if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`" => if the bucket name is `test-sink-gcs` and the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`

>     - To get a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - To get a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button and add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx`.
```

>     - To get a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, and then click the copy button add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the bucket name is `test-sink-gcs` and the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - To get a folder's gsutil URI, open the folder, click the copy button, and add `gs://` as a prefix. For example, if the bucket name is `test-sink-gcs` and the folder name is `changefeed-xxx`, the URI would be `gs://test-sink-gcs/changefeed-xxx`.
```

- Because TiDB Cloud uses TiCDC to establish changefeeds, it has the same [restrictions as TiCDC](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-overview#unsupported-scenarios).
- If the table to be replicated does not have a primary key or a non-null unique index, the absence of a unique constraint during replication could result in duplicated data being inserted downstream in some retry scenarios.

## Step 1. Configure destination

> Navigate to the cluster overview page of the target TiDB cluster. Click **Changefeed** in the left navigation pane,click **Create Changefeed**, and select **Amazon S3** or **GCS** as the destination. The configuration process varies depend on the destination you choose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to the cluster overview page of the target TiDB cluster. Click **Changefeed** in the left navigation pane, click **Create Changefeed**, and select **Amazon S3** or **GCS** as the destination. The configuration process varies depend on the destination you choose.
```

Reviewer: 这里是只能选当前集群的 provider 吗？GCP 的集群没有看到 S3 的 destination 选项

Author: 是的

    </div>
    <div label="Configure Canal-JSON format">

   Canal-JSON is a plain JSON text format. To configure it, fill in the following fields:

   ![the data format of Canal-JSON](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-s3-02-data-format-canal-json.jpg)

    - **Date Separator**: To rotate data based on the year, month, and day, or choose not to rotate at all.
    - **Enable TiDB Extension**: When you enable this option, TiCDC sends [WATERMARK events](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#watermark-event) and adds the [TiDB extension field](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/ticdc-canal-json#tidb-extension-field) to Canal-JSON messages.

    </div>
    </SimpleTab>

4. In the **Flush Parameters** area, you can configure two items:

   ![Flush Parameters](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-flush-parameters.jpg)

>     - **Flush Interval**, with a default setting of 60 seconds, adjustable within a range of 2 seconds to 10 minutes;
>     - **File Size**, with a default setting of 64 MB, adjustable within a range of 1 MB to 512 MB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    - **Flush Interval**: set to 60 seconds by default, adjustable within a range of 2 seconds to 10 minutes;
    - **File Size**: set to 64 MB by default, adjustable within a range of 1 MB to 512 MB.

```

>    > **Note:**
>    > These two parameters will affect the quantity of objects generated in cloud storage, and they apply to each individual database table. If there are a large number of database tables, the same configuration will result in a corresponding increase in the number of objects generated, leading to an associated rise in the cost of invoking the cloud storage API. Therefore, it is advisable to configure the parameters appropriately based on your RPO (Recovery Point Objective) and cost requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Note:**
    >
    > These two parameters will affect the quantity of objects generated in cloud storage for each individual database table. If there are a large number of tables, using the same configuration will increase the number of objects generated and subsequently raise the cost of invoking the cloud storage API. 
    >
    > Therefore, it is recommended to configure these parameters appropriately based on your Recovery Point Objective (RPO) and cost requirements.
```

    </div>
    </SimpleTab>

4. In the **Flush Parameters** area, you can configure two items:

>     ![Flush Parameters](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-flush-parameters.jpg)
> 
>     - **Flush Interval**: set to 60 seconds by default, adjustable within a range of 2 seconds to 10 minutes;
>     - **File Size**: set to 64 MB by default, adjustable within a range of 1 MB to 512 MB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Flush Interval**: set to 60 seconds by default, adjustable within a range of 2 seconds to 10 minutes;
    - **File Size**: set to 64 MB by default, adjustable within a range of 1 MB to 512 MB.

    ![Flush Parameters](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/sink-to-cloud-storage-flush-parameters.jpg)
```

    > **Note:**
    >

>     > These two parameters will affect the quantity of objects generated in cloud storage for each individual database table. If there are a large number of tables, using the same configuration will increase the number of objects generated and subsequently raise the cost of invoking the cloud storage API. 
>     >
>     > Therefore, it is recommended to configure these parameters appropriately based on your Recovery Point Objective (RPO) and cost requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > These two parameters will affect the quantity of objects generated in cloud storage for each individual database table. If there are a large number of tables, using the same configuration will increase the number of objects generated and subsequently raise the cost of invoking the cloud storage API. Therefore, it is recommended to configure these parameters appropriately based on your Recovery Point Objective (RPO) and cost requirements.
```
